The value of money over time is a
basic concept in finance that is very
intuitive, it is very easy to understand.
If you get into this situation, you
have two options.
You can choose between a million
euros today or a million euros
in ten years.
And here the answer is very easy.
I prefer a million euros today.
And why?
Basically for two reasons.
One, because there will probably
be inflation in ten years, prices
will rise and the purchasing
power of that million euros
will be lower within ten years.
I prefer it today.
This is what we call
the opportunity cost.
If I have a million euros today
I will get an interest or I
will get a profit during these
ten years.
If you give me it in ten years, well,
because I’ll miss out on the
opportunity to generate all
those interests.
This was very easy, but imagine that
we are putting ourselves in a more
complex situation and we have to evaluate
or we have to compare or analyze
or make decisions by comparing alternatives.
One million euros today, one eats
four million within receiving a flow
of two hundred and five thousand
euros over the next five years.
How do we compare this?
Because of course, if we compare it like
this, what we are doing is
to compare pears with apples.
What we have to do is calculate
the present or future value
of those alternatives.
We have incorporated two very important
concepts, present value and future
value, which is very intuitive.
The present value of these three alternatives
would be the value today of those
cash flows regardless
of when they have been generated
and the future value since it
is the value in this case
within five years.
What we have to learn is to calculate
those present values or those future
values and for that we introduce
two other concepts that is to
capitalize or discount or update,
which are sometimes used
for cash flows, payments, etc.,
to move them to a future moment
and discount is the opposite.
In the case we had before, well,
because what we can do is that
million euros we receive
today, we can capitalize
it, that now we will see the formula,
to see what is its value within
five years or vice versa, option
B one eats four million
within five years what we are
doing is through a discount of
the update of that
amount and we could do the
same with that flow of 205
thousand euros a year.
We could convert it into a present
value by discounting those flows or
we can capitalize them and see what
the value is within five years.
Now let’s see the formula we use
both to capitalize and to discount
because as you will see it
is the same formula and we
start with capitalization.
What we want is to calculate
the future value of a charge,
cash flow, etc., or present
value.
What we do here is multiply.
Multiply by a capital factor.
As you can see, future value is equal
to present value by the capitalization factor.
What is this capitalization factor?
It depends on the type of interest
that will be generated and the number
of periods.
And if we do the opposite, what
we do is update, rather than
multiply, what we will do is
divide by that same amount.
In this case it would not be a capitalization
factor, it would be an upgrade
or discount factor.
What we will do is discount those
amounts and as you can see we
have in mind the same variables
that are the interest rate
and the number of periods.
The formula is very simple.
You may not understand it intuitively
yet, but if we put an example
and a simple example like
the one we’ll see, you’
ll understand it.
We will take everything to the
extreme of simplicity.
There is only one year, there is
only a period that could be a year, a month,
whatever it is.
In this case, we need to calculate
the future value.
We know the present value.
The current value is one, one million.
The interest rate is 10%, and the
period is one.
What is the future value?
It is easy, it is easy.
A million, we will multiply by that
capitalization factor that is 10%,
which would be one with one and
above the period is one.
Very easy, right?
What is the future value in this case?
It is 1.1 million.
Now we will do the opposite.
We will discount with the same
type of interest, we have taken
it forward, we have capitalized
and we will discount it, we will update it.
We will bring it back, we will bring
it back to the present moment.
That is 1.1 million.
Remember that the formula was, in
this case, instead of
multiplying, what we will
do is divide.
We will divide the future value
between that upgrade factor, which
in this case is the same type of
interest, we have made a 10%.
Well, then very easy.
What will come out of us?
We will get the same million
euros.
As you have seen, to capitalize
what we do is to multiply by
that capitalization factor
that depends on the type of
interest and the number of periods
and to discount a future value
or a quantity, whatever, we
will do the opposite.
We will divide it.